So this is the circuit of three transistor
D Ram why 3 transistor diagram. You can see we
we have three transistor M1 M2 and M3. All right.
Now, let's see overall view of this circuit
first, we have the bit and bit bar lines.
So this are the two lines.Now. This can act
as input lines or output lines.Then we have
the read and write lines.Now. This is a similar
type of word line. What word line did
it can be 1 or 0 similarly read line and write.
line can be 1 or 0 then we have the pre-charge
capacitors. Now this are the pre-charged capacitor
already charged. Right? Then we have this capacitor
Cs so this is basically is the main part
of the memory, right? We are going to write
here like the x is the main part we are going
to write here and we are going to read from
here. So this area we will use to write in
X and this area we will use to read from the
X. So this is the basic meaning of the overall circuit.
So first let's see the write operation.So
the very first step involved in this is we
have to make the right line as one simple.
So if we make the right line as one
this means that we have to make the read line
as 0 if we do that what will happen. Let's
see that if this is 1 then this would be on
so second point is M1 would be on right only
M1 is connected to this line. This means
that really zero. This means that M3 is
off because it is connected to it. Similarly
M3 is off and here you can see M2 is also
off so M2 and M3 are off now. Let's see the
further part. Now, you know that this area
is off. It is gone.Then what we have to do
we have to focus on this area.Now.This is
very simple now in this area we have only
the bed line. And we have the capacitor and
we have this stored capacitor, right? So you
already know that C1 is pre-charged. So the
value we know that it is charged VDD right
and bit now. This is the important part whether
it would be input or it would be output.Now.
That is the question. It is very simple what
you are doing write operation. We have to
write in this x surely. This would be input
because we are placing here one or we can
place here zero.So output it is not present
here. So this line would act as input simple.
So next point is bit line is acting as input
line.Now, this is charged. This is the input
line now if you place here the one so what
will happen. So here we have VDD now to overcome
this transistor this transistor have some
VTN  that is known as the threshold voltage of this transistor. You can simply look at
this.So suppose.This is the threshold voltage
VTN  if you have to make so this is the on
area and this is the off If you have to overcome,
all right, if you have to make this transistor
on you have to overcome VTN so this is what
we are doing. So here we have VTN. So the
overall voltage here would be VDD minus VTN Because it requires some voltage VTN here and
here so it will consume VTN.So we are subtracting
VTN from it because after VTN this transistor
would be on and the value of x is now VDD
minus VTN  Simple so this was the calculation
here that the X stores VDD minus VTN now
if now this is possible when bit is 1 correct.
Now if bit line is 0 then the value of x is
0 simple.So now let's take a quick recap what
we have done in write operation first.We made
the write as 1 and write as 0 if we make this this
means that this transistor is on this both
are off. So this area is gone and this area
is present in this area. We are using bit
as the input line and the capacitor
here is already pre charged to VDD
Now this voltage depends on whether it
is 1 or 0 if it is 1 with the voltage here
is VDD if it is 0 the voltage here is 0 then
we are checking the value of x if this is
VDD  it would take some VTN value to come here.So
x value would be VDD minus VTN and when bit
line is 1 now when bit line is 0 x value is
0 now. We have to know that if this is Is
1 this will obviously be 0 and if this is
0 this obviously would be 1 so that is the
next point that is what is the effect on bit
bar.If this is 1 this would be forced to 0
if this is 0 this would be forced to one now
after doing this what we do is
we make W line as 0 so we have successfully
write the value of x in this cell. So this
was the write  operation now, let's move on
to the read operation now. Talk about the
read operation. Now. This is a very simple
operation first point.We have to note that
read lines should be 1 read line should be
1 this means that write line should be 0
because we are doing the read operation. Now
when this is 1 this means that M3 is on right
you can see a direct connection M3 is on and
W is 0 this means that M1 is off.
So second point is also very simple third
Point read is one. This is on the value. Here
of C2 is VDD because it is Pre- Charge. So the
bit lines that is the bit bar line has the
value here as VDD.So the third point is it
is pre-charged the bit bar value here is VDD
So C2 is recharged. And now four point this
is on now the whole case depends here. Now.What
is that is the fourth point if x value is
VDD minus VTN if this is the case then
M2 would be on If M2 is on and M3 is on and
the voltage here is VDD  you can see that
it capacitor will discharge and the voltage
here would be decreased. Right? So this is
the flow where it would discharge to ground
and the voltage here will decrease now It
means that the bit bar voltage so bit bar
voltage tends to 0 and this is sent to sense
amplifier. And it says that if this is happening
that bit bar value is decreasing to zero sense
amplifier will see that the output is 1 so
in this way we can read from the cell What
is the output? Suppose if x was 0 then what
will happen if x is 0 this would be off if
this is off then the bit bar has the voltage
VDD and it does not have any way to discharge
right the capacitor don't have any way to
discharge. So the value will VDD will remain
as it is. This means that the bit bar voltage
will remain as it is and the sense amplifier
will say if the voltage is as it is out. Output
is equal to 0 so in this simple way we can
read this. So let's take a quick recap. What
we have done is read line is 1 write line is
0 second.If this is 1 what will happen in
M3 is on and this is 0 what will happen
M1 is of then we are using the pre charged
capacitor. So the voltage here we have is
VDD then M2 is on when X is VDD minus VTN
so this is the important player here if x
is VDD minus VTN  M2 is on if X is 0 M2 is
off so if it is on then capacitor has a way
to discharge if this is off capacitor don't
have any way to discharge and the voltage
will be VDD remain as it is. So the bit bar
line again, it can tend to 0 or it can remain
to one. So if capacitor don't discharge,
then there is no way that bit bar will lose
its voltage. If it doesn't lose its voltage.This
means that bit bar is similar to one this means
output is 0 if capacitor discharge, then bit
bar will lose its voltage.That means that
bit bar will tends to 0 and then sense amplifier
will say that output is one done